Caliptra 2p0 spec updates (hardware architectural sections for Caliptra 2p0 and Subsystem) (#231)
chipsalliance/Caliptra: doc/Caliptra.md

*Figure 2: Caliptra high level blocks*

![](./images/Caliptra2p0.png)

See the [hardware section](#hardware) for a detailed discussion.

> From Caliptra 2.x onwards, Caliptra introduces two modes of operation. **Passive** mode which was supported in 1.x architecture and **Subsystem** mode. Fundamental difference between passive mode and subsystem mode is that in the subsystem mode Caliptra is the RoT for the SOC and provides streaming boot, secure boot and attestation. In Subsystem mode, Caliptra also provides various crypto API services such as encryption/decryption of SOC FWs, Key releases, Key wraps, hashing etc. to name a few. Please see Caliptra subsystem mode Crypto API section for more details (**FIXME**: section name & details).

Reviewer: I think in passive mode many of these things are true as well. I would say something like this instead

```suggestion
From Caliptra 2.x onwards, Caliptra introduces two modes of operation. **Passive** mode which was supported in 1.x architecture and **Subsystem** mode.

In sybststem mode, Caliptra is the only RoT for the SoC, and provides the following additional services:

* Streaming boot
* Secure boot enforcement
* SoC FW Decryption

In both modes, Caliptra 2.0 provides additional crypto offload features such as key release, key wrapping, hashing etc. Please see Caliptra subsystem mode Crypto API section for more details (**FIXME**: section name & details).
```

Author: Hi Jordan - For key wrapping etc. functions & key releases, you need AXI manager to be operational as Caliptra directly writes to the destination; Since passive only has AXI-SUB, crypto offload functions are not possible without FW having visibility to keys; even hashing is mailbox size dependent which subsystem doesnt constrain

Reviewer: * For hashing, I don't think there's significant demand for mailbox hashing in passive mode. I think we'd mainly be looking for streaming mode support.
* For key wrapping, I need to understand this a bit better. I'll do another pass through the spec. But I'll consider that non-blocking for this PR.

So my main suggestions for this text are mostly wording changes at this point. I want to make it clear that subsystem is additive and that passive mode is still fully supported.

I would be ok with just opening an issue and I can make a PR later with suggestions.

Author: " I think we'd mainly be looking for streaming mode support." -> my take (or strong stance) is if someone wants to Caliptra to act as security controller use Caliptra in subsystem mode.

"For key wrapping, I need to understand this a bit better." -> There is no hardware in passive mode to take the wrapped key and put it in MB or register for SOC to read. Not a HW feature. If FW can see the wrapped keys, then you can do this.

Author: Also generally speaking, there was no direction/decision to make HW between passive and active to act the same way (and there is too much rearchitecture to do now given the freeze is end of this month). The only thing with passive was to keep legacy (FW) capabilities intact. And the only one we fixed/changed is SHA streaming boot which was a FIPS issue and functional problem in 1.0

See [Error Reporting and Handling](#error-reporting-and-handling) for details about Caliptra and SoC firmware load and verification error handling.

*Figure 3: Passive Caliptra boot flow*

![](./images/Boot_flow.png)

**Subsystem Mode Boot Flow**

> MCU (Manufacterer Control Unit), that is holds platform & SOC specific FW and Caliptra are among the first microcontrollers taken out of reset by the power-on reset logic. Caliptra is responsible for the start of the firmware chain-of-trust with the immutable component of the MCU ROM. After the Caliptra ROM completes initialization, it provides a "stash measurement" API and callback signals for MCU ROM (subsystem mode) to proceed with the boot process. Caliptra ROM supports stashing of at most eight measurements prior to the boot of Caliptra RT firmware.  Then Caliptra FW is loaded through OCP streaming boot flow. Any security-sensitive code (eg. PLL programming) or configuration (eg. Fuse based Patching) loaded by the MCU prior to Caliptra firmware boot must be stashed within Caliptra. If the MCU exceeds Caliptra ROM's measurement stash capacity, attestation must be disabled until the next cold reset. 

Reviewer 2: s/Manufacterer/Manufacturer

Note: This is extremely high level flow, please see the Subsystem Mode Section below for next level specifics.

The high level boot process is as follows:

1. Hardware executes SoC power-on reset logic. This logic starts the execution of MCU ROM and Caliptra ROM.

> 2. Recovery interface is gated until ready for recovery is written into recovery interface registers from Caliptra ROM. This happens at the same time as passive mode's ready_for_fw signal.

Reviewer 2: I think MCU also needs a register bit to gate the recovery interface. The interface should only be open once both MCU ROM and Caliptra ROM set their respective bits.

Reviewer 2: seems like this is synchronized on fuse_done instead, so this can be dropped

Author: > I think MCU also needs a register bit to gate the recovery interface. The interface should only be open once both MCU ROM and Caliptra ROM set their respective bits.

Since MCU is bringing up I3C and Caliptra out of reset, MCU will bring up Caliptra or write fuse controller done only after it resolves any dependencies with I3C. Are you thinking something else?

Author: > seems like this is synchronized on fuse_done instead, so this can be dropped

AH, you thought the same thing, got it :-)

> 2. Recovery interface is gated until ready for recovery is written into recovery interface registers from Caliptra ROM. This happens at the same time as passive mode's ready_for_fw signal.

Reviewer: nit: Should this be formatted as `ready_for_recovery` to refer to a specific signal?

Author: Reason I didnt combine everything is because it is not a wire but an explicit register write

3. Caliptra firmware is streamed & then pulled into Caliptra MB SRAM through the OCP streaming boot aka recovery interface by a platform component (typically a BMC-like component).
        1. Caliptra ROM authenticates, measures, and activates the Caliptra firmware following OCP streaming boot protocol.
4. SOC manifest is streamed next using the streaming boot protocol, which Caliptra authenticates & measures
5. This is followed by MCU RT FW through the streaming boot protocol which Caliptra routes to MCU SRAM, authorizes and activates MCU to execute it.

> 6. MCU RT FW will go through MCTP enumeration and fetch the remaining SOC blobs (FW, data etc.) using MCTP PLDM and uses Caliptra to authorize each of them. Note that MCU may also retrieve some non-FW blobs from a NVM while using Caliptra to perform security operations like integrity verification, decryption etc.

Reviewer 2: s/MCTP PLDM/DSP0267 PLDM for Firmware Update over MCTP

### UDS

> A combination of mask ROM and HW macros must implement the DICE key derivation and power-on latch, hiding the UDS seed and only making the CDI-derived signing public key visible to ROM and private key 'handle' available to ROM. Real UDS will only be calculated during the cold boot, used for CDI derivation and immediately gets cleared.

Reviewer: A couple wording nits

```suggestion
A combination of mask ROM and HW macros must implement the DICE key derivation and power-on latch, hiding the UDS seed and only making the CDI-derived signing key 'handle' visible to ROM. Real UDS will only be calculated during the cold boot in hardware, used for CDI derivation and immediately gets cleared.
```

The owner key, when represented in fuses or in the FMC's alias certificate, is a SHA384 hash of a structure that contains a list of owner public keys. This supports key rotation.

## Provisioning UDS during Manufacturing

![](./images/Manuf-UDS-Flow.png)

> *Figure 6: Subsystem Mode: UDS manufacturing flow*

Reviewer 2: Is there anything tying these flows to Subsystem? I think Subsystem and Passive can be the same.

Reviewer: +1. Let's look into whether these manufacturing flows can/should be used in either mode. It would be nice to only have to maintain one set of flows.

Author: This is talking about how Caliptra is responsible for writing to fuse controller for programming UDS over the AXI manager interface. We wont have this interface in passive mode since we said Caliptra will only have AXI SUB in passive.

Reviewer 2: But is that a beneficial way of designing the feature? the value could have just been written to a Caliptra register for example.

Author: I definitely don't want to do that. If folks want to use passive mode, let them adhere to 1.x mode of UDS seed generation. There is already lot of trust on the SOC manager. Don't want to add/validate/maintain these smaller configs.

# Hardware

Please refer to Caliptra HW specification -> https://github.com/chipsalliance/caliptra-rtl/blob/main/docs/CaliptraHardwareSpecification.md 

> ## Caliptra FW push flow for Passive/Legacy Mode

Reviewer: nit: Just use the term "Passive" mode, rather than "Legacy". We want to make it clear that both modes will remain supported.

Author: Fixed legacy name; but as I commented above to Varun, passive mode cannot run UDS manuf flows because it doesnt have the necessary HW interfaces namely AXI-MGR. This was the decision we took few months ago. AXI-SUB cannot initiate a transaction and that is just how ARM HW spec is defined.

Author: Also cant respond to the hash calculation HW API comment, but same comment as above and I wrote more explanation and reasons why we did that.

Reviewer: Oh, let's discuss the UDS manufacturing flows in the other comment thread. Closing this one.

The Caliptra mailbox commands are specified in the [Caliptra runtime firmware specification](https://github.com/chipsalliance/caliptra-sw/blob/main/runtime/README.md#maibox-commands).

> ### Hash calculation HW API (Subsystem mode only)

Reviewer 2: why is this Subsystem only?

Reviewer: In general, I think all of the crypto offload should be usable in both modes

Author: Because we removed exposing SHA directly over AXI-SUB to resolve two fundamental issues we faced during 1.x:

FIPS issue: someone can use that SHA pre-FIPS testing
Functional issue: Someone can lock that SHA not allowing FW to use it to accelerate its hash calc and is being fed block by block in 1.x

Further that capability was added for folks that wanted to keep Caliptra as the only security controller in the chip; so they can take subsystem for integration.

In addition to solving above problems, it reduces maintenance and validation of multiple configurations.

Author: "In general, I think all of the crypto offload should be usable in both modes" - unless AXI-MGR exists and you enable that support in passive mode, which we said we should not as a starting point, we will not have the same capabilities

Reviewer 2: We should talk more about this as this is a feature regression.

Author: Yes, we can but my stance is anyone wanting to use Caliptra to do SOC level hashing, they can use subsystem mode. The feature was added for certain company that wanted to have Caliptra as a single security controller.

Reviewer: I'm not sure how significant the performance regression would be, but in theory we could have a mailbox API for hashing.

In passive mode I do think there's still value in using Caliptra for crypto offload where possible since it makes the SoC iRoT simpler.

"unless AXI-MGR exists and you enable that support in passive mode, which we said we should not as a starting point during the guardrails, we will not have the same capabilities."

Is this a technical limitation (i.e. technically challenging to expose hash acc w/o AXI-MGR) or just a design decision (for the reasons you listed above). Trying to figure out if it's worth discussing those points or if there's a deeper technical issue.

Author: It might be possible with a bunch of FW configurations but we need SOCs to trust that Caliptra FW will not access anything on SOC in passive mode. We can talk more about this. Would you be OK if we bin this item and mark this comment resolved? 

@jhprabhu can merge the PR if you are fine with it

Author: I think @jhand2 gave a go...so marking this resolved

All fuse based cryptographic keying material and seeds (for example, UDS Seed) shall be generated (on-chip or off-chip) per requirements described in [Reference 8](#ref-8).

> SoC shall support in-field programmable fusing. [Fuse Map](#fuse-map) shows which fuses are expected to be in-field programmable. SoCs shall implement authorization for in-field programmable fusing to mitigate denial-of-service attacks. Authorization design is outside the scope of this specification. In Subsystem mode, SOC may use MCU RT FW for these actions.

Reviewer 2: why limit to Subsystem?

Author: all this part is saying is that the SOC has a choice to MCU RT FW for doing in-field programming. Not limiting to subsystem. Let me know if the statement is reading wrong somehow

Reviewer 2: Yes I think this sentence is unnecessary.

> SoC shall support a field entropy programming API. The API shall support retrieving an input value from an external interface. It should cryptographically mix that value with the output of an on-die TRNG to generate the field entropy value. The API implementation shall burn the field entropy value into the first available field entropy fuse slot (or fail if no slots are available). Caliptra is expected to be in any security state. The device owner is expected to call this API in a “clean room environment” to minimize risk of attack on the programming process. In Subsystem mode, SOC may use MCU RT FW for these actions.

Reviewer 2: why limit to Subsystem?

Author: all this part is saying is that the SOC has a choice to MCU RT FW for doing in-field programming. Not limiting to subsystem. Let me know if the statement is reading wrong somehow

1. SoC (using its HW or MCU ROM) performs pre-steps like bringing up CRO or PLL, MBIST flows on SRAMs, SRAM Init etc.
2. SOC will assert MCU & Caliptra pwrgood and after 10 cycles MCU
3. MCU ROM or SOC Manager wrapper will bring up fuse controller and any other SOC specific infrastructure RTL modules (I3C, GPIO programming, Glitch detector programming etc.)
4. MCU ROM or SOC Manager wrapper will deassert Caliptra reset.
5. Caliptra HW will read the security centric (secret) fuses.
6. MCU ROM waits for ready_for_fuses to be asserted.
7. MCU ROM or SOC Manager will populate the remaining fuses of Caliptra and reads its own fuses (if any). Note that this step is gated behind the completion of security fuse writes to ensure the step has completed.
8. MCU ROM will write “fuse done” to Caliptra.
9. Caliptra will go through its boot flow of bringing up uC.
10. Caliptra ROM starts and executes various KATs flows.

**Subsystem Boot Flow**

**_If (Caliptra-Passive-Mode)_**

1. SOC Manager goes through legacy flows => loads Caliptra FW using legacy flows, Caliptra sets RT ready and SOC  <-> Caliptra boot flow is done.
   

> **_(Caliptra-Active-Mode)_**

Reviewer 2: s/Active/Subsystem

> 1. Caliptra ROM waits for SOC infrastructure readiness indication. If this indication is set, Caliptra will do the identity derviationderivation flows. If it is not set, then this flow is run when the SOC infrastructure readiness indication is set.

Reviewer 2: s/derivationderivation/derivation

> 1. Caliptra ROM waits for SOC infrastructure readiness indication. If this indication is set, Caliptra will do the identity derviationderivation flows. If it is not set, then this flow is run when the SOC infrastructure readiness indication is set.

Reviewer 2: Is the readiness notification just "fuse done"? would be simpler to state that.

Author: For example, SOC infrastructure readiness could be like getting PQC signature from external component etc. ; just an example of something that needs to be done using the data blob that came over before identify flows can be run

Author: added FIXME to this step due to the other comment like the following

**FIXME:** Security and operations impact of this step/flow is being analyzed. This capability/flexibility will be updated or removed once that is finalized.

2. Caliptra ROM will follow the recovery interface protocol to load its FW. Please see the specific section for next level specifics; At a high level, Caliptra ROM sets the device ready in the I3C controller and poll I3C for the payloads.
3. BMC or a similar platform component will send the image (code or data) through OCP recovery flow protocol.
   a. Caliptra ROM should implement a recovery capability to allow for BMC to send ‘data’ instead of ‘code’ as a SOC specific configuration OR allow MCU ROM to send some data to be either integrity checked or authenticated. The data flow and code flow over recovery interface is the same from physical interface point of view and follows the recovery spec as implemented in Caliptra subsystem documentation (please see the recovery section).
   b. This need for data flow (from flash or BMC) is indicated by a SOC configuration bit to Caliptra ROM.

>    c. This ‘data’ flow is possible only before SOC infra readiness is set. This is specifically used for scenarios where PUF or other characterization data is coming off-chip (say a flash or BMC)

Reviewer 2: this provides a glitch hook for UDS seed loading, seems dangerous.

Reviewer: +1

Author: I agree - this is where device specific content/recovery from platform  (eg. PUF characterization data or PQC related fuse content etc.) get nasty - without them we will have chicken and egg problem and all the more reason to figure out a solution without platform dependencies :)

Reviewer 2: I think this needs to be tied to an explicit requirement, because @Bryankel had previously argued against such hooks in the past for this reason.

Author: @varuns-nvidia - I think this is what we should do to resolve the spec; we add this as a config, leave a FIXME to analyze security around this before finalizing this.

I am actually 100% aligned that there should be no SOC specific data that is needed for RoT functionality stored on the platform to make it operational (eg. PUF characterization data, PQC signature etc.); All that data is within the SOC "package"

Author: Added this - "**FIXME:** Security and operations impact of this step/flow is being analyzed. This capability/flexibility will be updated or removed once that is finalized."

>    d. This data must be hashed into PCR0

Reviewer 2: why PCR0? shouldn't mix per-part data with per-class firmware measurements.

Author: I lifted it from existing literature where FW was stating it is in PCR0 but I really dont care TBH :-)

Reviewer 2: yes it has to be a different PCR.

Author: Fixed to say generic PCR to allow implementation to make a call.

**SOC-FW Hitless Update**

SOC may have other components that may need to be updated at run-time in a hitless/impactless manner.

The update flow will follow the same sequence as MCU Hitless update except they are executed by the MCU by using Caliptra as the RoT engine for doing all the required authentication/authorization flows.

Further SOCs may require the hitless update without impacting the workloads/VMs running on the host or the VMs using the devices. This essentially means that impactless update must happen without causing any timeouts to the in-flight transactions. While the treatment of those transactions are device dependent, Caliptra subsystem must provide a way to be able to authenticate and activate the FW in the shortest time possible.

Caliptra subsystem provides this architectural capability as follows:
1. MCU provides SOC manifest to Caliptra and waits for authentication to be successful. If this wasn’t provided Caliptra will use the latest SOC manifest available.
   a. If failed, MCU uses MCTP PLDM to report the same to the update agent using PLDM protocol

> 2. MCU stages all the incoming FW payload in an SOC-defined staging memory and provides the MMIO address of the staging SRAM to Caliptra. It is better to keep this as a part of the authenticated SOC manifest (as a configuration) from security perspective.

Reviewer 2: should state this as a requirement to keep the MMIO address in the manifest

Author: Allow FW arch team to set that manifest or should we just make it a tops down requirement?

Reviewer 2: top down because it's required by the threat model

Author: Added this - "(**FW Arch requirement:** This SOC-defined staging RAM MMIO offset which can be one for all the images or it could be per image, recommended to keep it the later way, should be defined in the SOC manifest.)"

![](./images/Subsystem.png)

**Caliptra Subsystem Architectural Flows**

**Subsystem (Pre-FW Load) Boot Flow **

**Note:** Any step done by MCU HW/ROM would have been performed by “SOC Manager” in Caliptra 1p0.

1. SoC (using its HW or MCU ROM) performs pre-steps like bringing up CRO or PLL, MBIST flows on SRAMs, SRAM Init etc.
2. SOC will assert MCU & Caliptra pwrgood and after 10 cycles MCU
3. MCU ROM or SOC Manager wrapper will bring up fuse controller and any other SOC specific infrastructure RTL modules (I3C, GPIO programming, Glitch detector programming etc.)
4. MCU ROM or SOC Manager wrapper will deassert Caliptra reset.
5. Caliptra HW will read the security centric (secret) fuses.
6. MCU ROM waits for ready_for_fuses to be asserted.
7. MCU ROM or SOC Manager will populate the remaining fuses of Caliptra and reads its own fuses (if any). Note that this step is gated behind the completion of security fuse writes to ensure the step has completed.
8. MCU ROM will write “fuse done” to Caliptra.
9. Caliptra will go through its boot flow of bringing up uC.
10. Caliptra ROM starts and executes various KATs flows.

**Subsystem Boot Flow**

**_If (Caliptra-Passive-Mode)_**

> 1. SOC Manager goes through legacy flows => loads Caliptra FW using legacy flows, Caliptra sets RT ready and SOC  <-> Caliptra boot flow is done.

Reviewer 2: Want to emphasize @jhand2 's point that all use of the term "legacy" should be replaced with "passive"

Author: Aye-Aye! Taken care of...
